p8105_hw2_tem2171
================
Teresa Moore
2023-10-01

    ## ── Attaching core tidyverse packages ──────────────────────── tidyverse 2.0.0 ──
    ## ✔ dplyr     1.1.3     ✔ readr     2.1.4
    ## ✔ forcats   1.0.0     ✔ stringr   1.5.0
    ## ✔ ggplot2   3.4.3     ✔ tibble    3.2.1
    ## ✔ lubridate 1.9.2     ✔ tidyr     1.3.0
    ## ✔ purrr     1.0.2     
    ## ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
    ## ✖ dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
    ## ✖ dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()
    ## ℹ Use the conflicted package (<http://conflicted.r-lib.org/>) to force all conflicts to become errors

## Problem 2

``` r
mr_trash_wheel=
  readxl::read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", range="A2:N549") |>
  mutate(trash_wheel = "mr") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  drop_na() |>
  mutate(homes_powered = (weight_tons * 500) / 30)
  
professor_trash_wheel = 
  readxl::read_excel("data/professor trashwheel.xlsx", range = "A2:M96") |>
  mutate(trash_wheel = "professor")|>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  drop_na()|>
  mutate(homes_powered = (weight_tons * 500) / 30)

captain_trash_wheel = 
  readxl::read_excel("data/captain trashwheel.xlsx", range = "A2:K27") |>
  mutate(trash_wheel = "captain") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  drop_na()|>
  mutate(homes_powered = (weight_tons * 500) / 30)
  
gwynnda_trash_wheel = 
  readxl::read_excel("data/gwynnda trashwheel.xlsx", range = "A2:K108") |>
  mutate(trash_wheel = "gwynnda")|>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  drop_na()|>
  mutate(homes_powered = (weight_tons * 500) / 30)

mr_trash_wheel$year <- as.character(mr_trash_wheel$year)
professor_trash_wheel$year <- as.character(professor_trash_wheel$year)
captain_trash_wheel$year <- as.character(captain_trash_wheel$year)
gwynnda_trash_wheel$year <- as.character(gwynnda_trash_wheel$year)

trash_wheels_combined_df= 
  bind_rows(mr_trash_wheel, professor_trash_wheel, captain_trash_wheel, gwynnda_trash_wheel)

cigarette_butts_july_2021_gwynnda=
  filter(gwynnda_trash_wheel, month=="July", year=="2021")|>
  select(month, year, cigarette_butts)
```

The number of observations in the resulting dataset,
trash_wheels_combined, is 641. Some key variables in the dataset are:
the dumpster number, the month and year the trash was collected, the
weight in tons, as well as the number of specific types of trash
collected, such as glass bottles and grocery bags. The total weight
collected by Professor Trash Wheel was 190.12 tons.The total number of
cigarette butts collected by Gwynnda in July of 2021 was 0 butts.

# Problem 3

``` r
mci_baseline=
  read.csv("data_mci/MCI_baseline.csv")|>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  mutate(
    apoe4=
      case_match(
      apoe4,
     1 ~ "carrier",
     0 ~ "non-carrier"),
    apoe4 = as.factor(apoe4)) |>
  mutate(
    sex=
      case_match(
      sex,
     1 ~ "male",
     0 ~ "female"),
    sex = as.factor(sex))|>
  rename(years_of_education=education)|>
  rename(study_id=id)

female_df =
  filter(mci_baseline, sex=="female")|>
  select(sex, apoe4)

female_apoE4_carriers =
  filter(female_df, apoe4 == "carrier")
```

Important steps in the import process included removing the top line
that explained what each entry meant (i.e female=0, male=1). Removing
this row from the table was okay because we changed the numeric entries
to what they coded for. We also renamed the education column to years of
education to be clear. In this dataset, we have the study id, current
age in years, the sex (male or female), the years of education, and the
apoe4 carrier status.

The amount of people who are recruited to the study (those who do not
have MCI at the start) is 483 people.

The average baseline age is 65.0467909 years.

The proportion of women in the study who are APOE4 carriers is
0.2985782.

``` r
mci_amyloid=
  read.csv("data_mci/mci_amyloid.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() 

mci_combined= 
  left_join(mci_baseline, mci_amyloid, by = "study_id")

common_participants =
  left_join(mci_baseline, mci_amyloid, by = "study_id")

unique_to_baseline <- anti_join(mci_baseline, mci_amyloid, by = "study_id")

unique_to_amyloid <- anti_join(mci_amyloid,mci_baseline, by = "study_id")
```

It was important to remove the first line of the csv file, like with the
mci_baseline csv. I also went back and changed the name of the variable
“ID” in mci_baseline to match the name of the “study_id” variable, so
the databases could be joined by study_id. That way we would only have
the people who met the criteria for the study in the table.

There were 483 in the baseline dataset that were also in the amyloid
dataset. There are 8 individuals who are unique to the baseline dataset,
and 12 who are unique to the amyloid dataset.

The combined dataset has the patient id, current age in years, the sex
(male or female), the years of education, and the apoe4 carrier status,
as well as the time (in years) elapsed since the study baseline to the
visit where biomarker Amyloid \_ 42/40 ratio was measured.

``` r
write.csv(mci_combined,"data/mci_combined.csv")
```
